talking to Jonathan Haar, H-A-R-R, as opposed to H-E-R-R on this morning's USA Today.
Just enter the conversation.
I was saying it's a different style of nonfiction that's practiced by a few friends of mine, actually, Tracy Kidder.
Who I've interviewed a couple times.
I'll give him my best if he remembers me.
I certainly will.
He's a very good friend, and he really helped me out.
But some people end up taking exception to this, which is narrative stuff.
You try and tell a story.
For me, the most elemental thing in reading is telling a story, is making people turn the page to find out what happened next.
That was a threshold for me, by the way.
I mean, there are any number of fascinating book stories out there that are interesting or valid, but they had to be good stories to get in.
which is why Paul Mellon was boring and didn't get in.
But I think that's what you're saying.
But Tracy, from what I've read, actually suggested this to you, this subject.
Is that right?
He did.
Someone suggested it to him.
That actually is like a Tracy Kenner kind of story.
I was writing for New England Monthly and doing this kind of thing.
I did it half a dozen times.
And my favorite, I think, you know,
I had met C.D.B.
Bryan in 1976, just after Friendly Fire came out.
I was immensely impressed with that book.
And, you know, the origins of it are pretty clear.
It's like Truman Capote in Cold Blood, Tom Wolfe's book, which no one can hope to emulate the right stuff because it's got such an idiosyncratic writing style.
But C.D.B.
Bryan and John McPhee and Tracy...
Executioner's Song by Mailer.
Mailer.
I think it's the best one.
I love the right stuff.
I remember interviewing Tom Wolfe.
I spent three years in an aircraft carrier back in the 60s.
And I remember saying, geez, you've got this carrier down.
I mean, you've got this, the ward room.
So I said, you know, which one did you visit?
He said, I've never seen an aircraft carrier in my life.
I said, geez.
I said, are you serious?
I mean, phone calls.
He made some phone calls to describe the ward room for me.
I remember his story that appeared in Esquire, and it wasn't in the right stuff.
It didn't come out.
No.
But it was about a plane landing on an aircraft carrier, and basically three tons of metal crashing is what it was all about.
It was the most amazing piece of writing.
Yeah, but he'd never seen it.
And that's extraordinary.
Yeah, he'd never seen it.
And I've seen it like 10,000 times, and I'm not exaggerating the number.
I just saw 1,000 a day, 100 a day, about.
1,000 a week, some weeks, you know.
And I said, well, he's really got this carious stuff down.
Never seen one.
Called some people, and of course the people who interviewed him, but I'm sorry to go off the track.
So these are your spiritual... Yeah, that's my origins.
But, well, you can either talk about the style of writing or how I got the book.
Well, either way.
I'll tell you the way... Discursive interviews are fine with me.
I'll tell you the way.
You like tape recorders.
I've never used one because they baffle me.
And I always end up getting so much stuff.
A few times I have tried to use it.
I end up getting so much stuff that it's so laborious to transcribe.
I would have thought in a book like this that you'd really want to have the stuff.
You know, take notes.
I take notes, but... There's a few scenes like...
You know, the Helmsley Palace scene, when they go down to New York to negotiate with W.R.
Grace, in which there's a lot of dialogue going on.
It occupies maybe three pages of the book.
And, you know, people may wonder where I got this stuff.
One answer is I was privy to it.
But the other thing is that the conversation went on for three hours.
And as in most conversations, there's an enormous amount of repetition and digression and so on.
I took a lot of notes, and I don't pretend that I got down every single word they said, but I got down, and then I had to redact to compress.
As a practical matter, when I transcribe this tape, and I go to write the story,
If you don't have a verb agreeing with a noun, it'll agree with the noun in between the quotations.
I've never, I've done it close to a thousand authors, I've never had one complaint.
I mean, I think it's understood that... And that's true, too.
A lot of stuff I took out of transcripts,
because they're the best note-takers in the world.
You know, the way people speak, they don't speak in complete sentences.
They speak in fragments.
It's amazing when you actually encounter somebody who does... Some politicians.
Many politicians.
Somebody like Leonard Baskin on your neck of the woods, who's in my book.
He absolutely talks in wonderful, complete sentences.
I mean, you'd swear that the thing was edited in my book, but he actually said that he sees it.
Of course, he said he's a printer, too.
Gary sees it visually, which is interesting.
I guess you were an author in search of a book at this particular time in your life.
What happened was, yeah, that's exactly so.
I was working at New England Monthly.
I'd been there for two and a half years, and I was the first person hired to write for them.
I'd had an editing job before that, for a weekly newspaper, and I didn't like editing.
I went to New England Monthly to write.
And I became good friends with Tracy, who was right down the road from New England Monthly.
And he knew I was looking for a book.
He had just finished writing House.
And he got a call from a friend of Charlie Nesson's, who was the Harvard Law Professor in the book.
Nesson was playing poker.
I played poker every Wednesday night.
And one of the guys around the poker table knew
both Ness and Kidder.
And Nesson came to the poker table having just joined the lawsuit and started talking about him, very excited about what an incredible case this was.
And this guy said, maybe Tracy would be interested in writing about it.
And Charlie thought that was just great.
Interesting it came from that side of the case, though, isn't it?
Yeah, the plaintiff's side of the case, yeah.
I can't imagine it coming from the corporate side, the defendant's side.
And Charlie isn't your traditional kind of lawyer.
I don't know— That's why, of course, it behooves them.
Right, they want to get the word out.
Right, right.
And Tracy had just finished House, and he was doing his book tour, or just done with it, and wanted to take some time off.
I think I interviewed him on House.
You ran the risk, obviously, of, if not
taking sides, but being presumed to be an advocate.
And how do you respond to that, and how do you feel about it?
Well, I think the book is, you know, Schlickman is no unharnished hero in this book.
No, I have a question to ask you at some point.
Do you see him as a tragic hero at some point?
There's a lot of hubris there.
I mean, there really is great tragedy in a way.
You know, my sense was,
And there's some of the plaintiff's expert witnesses that don't come off so well, because I simply didn't believe their testimony.
Schlittman has a very, very difficult time during the course of trial with one particular expert witness, George Pinder, the hydrogeologist.
And I was essentially, I wanted to write what I saw, good, bad, or indifferent.
Now, having spent as much time as I did with the plaintiffs, you'd think that my sympathy would naturally lie in that direction.
But it seemed on the face of it that they had a legitimate taste.
This was not spurious.
I mean, Grace, it was clear Grace had dumped stuff on the ground and the Beatrice property was contaminated.
It was clear that the wells were contaminated with the same stuff that was on the Grace property and the Beatrice property.
And it was clear that there was an epidemic or at least a cluster of leukemia.
The CDC said so.
So I entered this case, you know,
I entered writing it thinking that there is some legitimate cause here that I'd like to explore.
Well, were you going in to examine a cause, or was this going to be the quintessential civil case?
You know, neither one, to be honest.
I didn't go in dying to write about judicial reform.
This wasn't the soul of a civil case, so to speak.
I think it turned out that way.
I like what...
Polonius says in Hamlet, by indirection, find directions out.
What I wanted to write was a story about people engaged in a major endeavor.
And I had wanted to write about lawyers.
In the mid-'80s, if you remember, insurance reform was a very hard thing.
The thing with machines is you do have to constantly—
In the mid-'80s, insurance reform was a big deal, and everybody's talking about medical malpractice driving the cost of medicine.
And that issue interested me quite a bit.
What I had hoped to do was explore, find a case which was a traditional medical malpractice case.
You know, one person injured in the hospital, and typically those cases last two to three weeks in trial, if they go to trial, if they don't settle first.
Which happens what percentage of the time?
Most of the time, doesn't it?
They settle about 95% of the time, yeah.
But I thought I would find one that didn't settle, or find a firm that I could hang around and watch them bring cases.
You know, the ones that go to trial are interesting simply because of that kind of courtroom drama.
But in fact, if real life is 95% of them settle, then that's something worth exploring too.
So, I had that in the back of my mind when I entered this, but I didn't—I was interested in writing about lawyers, because the law seems to be, you know, the fundament of the society, any urban industrial society.
The risk, of course, is you have no idea how it's going to turn out.
How it's going to turn out.
Especially once you're into it a number of years.
not only in material investment, but your time and your energy and everything.
That's right.
And it didn't quite end out the way maybe you'd have, for dramatic purposes, might have been, but of course it ended the way it ended as well.
It ended the way it ended, and the task was making a story out of the way it ended.
I was actually quite disappointed that it didn't get to the second phase of the medical
me, was the most critically interesting stuff.
And by the way, the least certain, I mean, to me it was very clear that Grace and Beatrice were responsible for the contamination of the wells.
Whether the stuff actually caused leukemia is yet another matter.
You know, the New York Times guy, Bernstein, took me to task of it for that.
But I never said it did.
I think you may have.
Oh, it's fine.
This is good.
This is a really good change.
So I was disappointed.
As long as the red light is on, it's fine.
I'll let you know when it goes on.
No, I just changed the batteries outside.
Well, does it make a sound when it completely spools out?
Yeah, but I know.
I've got an internal clock to whatever it does.
Go ahead.
I was disappointed when the verdict came back.
because I knew that it was very bad.
It made it very difficult for Schlickman to go on.
But then what ensued immediately after that was this amazing six weeks of negotiation with Beatrice, I mean with Grace, who was found liable.
And I followed that, and I had complete access.
I mean, I was with these guys in New York.
I was with them in their conference room when they were talking about what the hell they were going to do next.
I was with Schlickman in his office, you know, listening on the telephone, listening to him talk on the telephone to the other side.
So I knew that I had a hell of a good drama, even if the case didn't pan out the way, you know, didn't reach a verdict that would have been kind of easier to write about.
You don't want to write about a loss, in essence.
So you did kind of have a...
a vested interest in how it turned out.
Well, as you point out... From a writer's point of view.
Yeah.
Not necessarily from, you know, who you might be yourself rooting for.
Yeah, it's true.
As you point out, you enter these things not knowing where it's going to go, but you hope that the arc of it takes a shape that is suitable for dramatic purposes, you know, that it's interesting.
The ensuing four years,
in which he appealed and essentially his self-destruction was then quite fascinating to me as I watched that.
I had no idea where that was going to go.
Having no idea where things are going to go, at what point did you decide that this story could go on forever and that it's time really to write and to formulate this?
There was a problem.
When I first, when the verdict came in and I'd done much of the reporting up for the first, it was essentially eight months, up through the fall of 86, I wrote a proposal then, and my agent took it to Random House, who bought it immediately.
That's great.
Yeah, and Bob Loomis is just an incredible editor.
Well, he's wonderful.
I mean, besides being a great editor, just an incredibly good guy.
I mean, I'd send him pages of stuff.
I wrote a 1,500-page draft, essentially.
I'd send him pages of stuff, and he would call the moment he got it.
And he would call within two or three days, and we'd talk about it.
It was not, you know, the worst thing in the world for a writer is to hang on there and wait and say, oh, fuck, he doesn't like it.
You know, it's another feeling.
He was wonderful, but to get back to the
I knew I had a story with the, and I thought that was the climax, the end of the Grace negotiation in which Schlickman goes off to Hawaii.
He says, make me whole again to Gordon.
They got $8 million.
It wasn't what they expected.
Case turns out not to be the landmark that he had hoped, and he didn't get nearly the money.
But that's his problem, though, isn't it?
That's his problem.
In effect, it was my problem.
I mean, I would have been much luckier as a writer
In one sense, I was very lucky because I got inside and I followed the arc of this guy's destruction.
In another sense, I was unlucky because the case, what if the case had been a landmark?
Then I would have been writing, you know, like Anthony Lewis, writing about Gideon's trumpet, you know, a landmark case.
Well, what's wrong with that?
That's great.
I wish it had been, you know.
From a writer's standpoint, I wish it had established new law and changed, you know, the behavior of
But I think reading it, and I think the book's worth, is that aside from not being a landmark, but it's really the way this shit goes down day after day, and this is really what it's like.
And let's talk about Jen now, and maybe if you could respond to my suggestion that maybe he is.
kind of a tragic hero being afflicted as you already pointed out excessive pride and hubris and all these other things is that a fair observation on my part that maybe he does I think that's an observation you can certainly draw from the book from my own standpoint it became apparent to me that this really was Greek tragedy I mean here was a guy suing truth and justice or his version what he believed to be truth and justice
and willing to sacrifice everything for it.
It was true hubris.
And by contrast to Greek tragedy, is it not quixotic as well?
It is.
It's both, you know.
It's tilting at windmills as well as...
And that scene where he brings all these experts into it, puts them up at the Ritz, pays them 200 bucks an hour, feeds them.
Pays them for sleeping, right?
Yeah, this one guy bills them 100 bucks for sleeping.
And that pisses me off, you see.
I mean, you know, because we, whatever we do for research, we pay.
It comes out of here.
And this guy is in now for, what, 2.6 million or something?
Right.
And so if he gets eight, it's a wash for him, right?
He's not even.
Right.
Well, he was actually, even eight didn't do it for him.
He had to pay 2.6 million in fees.
I mean, he had these bills hanging over.
He essentially got
But that $2.6 million doesn't reflect the day-to-day operating costs of the office.
And what he lost by all the work that he couldn't take, for that matter.
He lost that, and he wasn't compensated for paying the electric bills, for paying the rent on the office.
The fee expenses in the case don't cover that kind of thing.
So not only did he not take other business, but it was for him in that loss.
You know, that's the risk you take.
Exactly so.
You step up to the plate and take the swings.
He expected a far bigger reward, and that's why he invested what he did.
And the reward he expected was certainly a monetary reward, not merely the fame and the notoriety that might have come.
Both, I think.
He wanted fame.
Here's his line in the book, you know.
I can't even remember.
Fame, money, and doing good.
Fame, fortune, and doing good.
Listen, I can put some of this in a glass.
Yeah, actually, if you could.
Why not?
I would like a shot of it.
I'm amazed, though, that you didn't tape record anything.
I really am.
I just don't like too much.
But did you get people to sign releases?
I'm flipping.
Nobody else.
I didn't get any.
Joe McGinnis, who I haven't talked to since, has got anything, only because he had to keep me treated.
But I remember he told me, the only time he ever got a release from anybody was from Jeffrey McDonald.
No, no, no, that's the other one.
McDonald, yeah.
The only time he ever had a release from Casey Voss, you know?
Yeah, they're essentially not worth the paper they're written on.
They're worthless, yeah.
It seems to me that if somebody's talking to a reporter and you tell them you're writing a book, you're taking notes in front of them, as long as you don't libel them, in the privacy issues, they essentially waive the privacy issues, especially with lawyers.
There's no way they could argue they didn't know I was doing a book.
How did that one instance where Schlichman goes to New York and he
terrible, and he's going to go on Good Morning America.
Ricky Kleeman, right?
He really entered the bedroom with him.
Well, I knew about the New York thing.
I'd interviewed Schlickman about that, and he didn't tell me about the bedroom scene.
And Donna Robbins I'd talked to, and Tom Kiley I'd talked to, who was all parties there.
I'd talked to Ricky quite a bit earlier.
I'd had two or three interviews with her before then.
And it was about three weeks after that night.
No, it was longer than that.
It was probably six weeks after that night.
We went out to dinner, the three of us.
I mean, Jan kind of never really wanted to be alone with her.
Don't put that in.
I don't know how much of this I'm going to put in.
Yeah, I know.
The three of us went out to dinner.
Because I hadn't talked to Ricky about that night.
Because I wanted more, I felt like I didn't have the detail, the texture of it.
And Jan was there and Ricky was there.
I started asking him about it.
In fact, we went to dinner here in Lafayette.
Ask him about what?
About that night in New York.
But also tell me why it's pertinent.
Why she made love to him, for instance.
Why that was pertinent to using your book.
Okay, I'll tell you.
But let me tell you how I got the information to begin with.
I wanted more texture for that night.
I wanted more to know.
to know more about what Jan was like.
And Ricky is really quite an astute observer.
And so we came to dinner here at Lafayette, as I recall.
And I started asking him about it.
And Ricky started telling me.
She told me about this confusion about who gets what room.
And I went upstairs.
She had no idea which room she was going into.
And Jan motions the guy with her bags into the room that his bags are going into.
She then knows.
And at that juncture, I stopped writing.
I mean, I was taking notes.
And she said, no, no, I want you to write this down.
So I started writing again.
Flickman's face was going down lower and lower, and it was soup.
And she told me the story, ending with, that was great sex, and he'll never remember a moment of it.
A line, when I called, when I sent her the reader's edition,
She called me up and she said, it's exactly like I remember.
There's one thing I'd change, it was that line.
And then she said, but I said it, so I won't change it.
And then she called me back two days later and said, listen, I have a request.
Can you change sex to something else?
So like it was a great night.
And the reader's edition says it was great sex, and the book itself says it was a great night.
It happens.
You have to do it.
Yeah.
I made similar...
concessions to people.
It was fine.
You know, she'd been so great with me.
So I had no problem.
I would have preferred it, the way she said it.
She admitted she said it that way.
Maybe Schlickle would have preferred it too.
Testament to his self-image.
So she told me this.
I thought I was wonderful.
Jan didn't say a word.
The next day, he asked me if I had to put that in the book.
And I said, no, I don't have to, but I'd like to.
And he said, well, do what you want.
But why?
Well, this was a woman who admitted, frankly, that she was pursuing him.
And when we first meet her, she flies up to Boston to watch him and give the summation in a very important case of his.
She's the one who gets him to come to Puerto Rico where he meets Charlie Nusson.
And throughout it, there's this business of her thinking that someday they'll get together.
They'll be married and they'll have kids.
She thought she could be in love with this guy.
And the book didn't have to have it, but it seemed to be, I mean, it was true life.
It really did happen.
And this is kind of the arc, the culmination of her
pursuit of him, which ends there.
Do you think that at the end when he's swimming out, of course he's since come back, I understand.
Yeah.
Three years in Hawaii, now he's back.
Doing what?
He's practicing law with Tom Kiley, but he's not doing a lot of it.
He's very indifferent about it.
He really doesn't want to practice law.
Well, did the case break him?
Yeah.
Emotionally, not just...
It was very close to a complete breakdown.
I think he really was suicidal.
There's also a scene in the book where one of his clients, Catherine Gamache, says to him, with great concern, we hope you're not going to jump out the window here.
This is after the appeals court delivers its affirmation of Skinner.
And he says, I'm not going to do anything like that.
But I think he was, he says, I don't know if he was ever going to truly commit suicide, but he was an incredible despondent.
You mentioned Skinner.
This might be a way to talk in generalities about the legal system, but you also point out at one point how the jury gives him a gift to keep the door open.
Yeah.
I'm thinking of the Simpson case where the jurors come back to Catalina and they give, you know, some cigars or something.
And you have all this, you know, Cochran posturing, as he's been doing, about this one juror.
He's going to taint the jury.
He wants this juror dismissed.
How do you feel this book?
Is this book a commentary on the legal system, which is really under intensive scrutiny now and has been?
So for the last year, certainly the criminal side, not the civil side, but I think we're looking at lawyers.
Well, civil side is under great scrutiny, too, limiting liability.
Exactly, which you wrote about in the op-ed page a couple months ago.
So just take it anywhere you want.
I'm glad you asked that question, because I've been trying to prepare for this, figuring out what the hell I'm going to say to these things, and I've got something prepared.
It's essentially...
I'll try and give you the speech I want to give when I'm on radio or something.
Don't tell them you've got to prepare them.
Of course not.
But I can tell you, because I know you're not going to write it.
But it's the whole author tour business, and I'm completely new to this, and as anxious as you can possibly be.
I'm going through exactly the same thing.
Monday, I'm taping a thing for NPR in Washington, and then I'm taping this one hour.
C-span thing.
I said, what the fuck do you do to get ready for this?
One hour with Brian Lamb, who is as laconic as— Well, but he's—I've watched him now.
I knew this was coming.
I don't need this on tape, if you don't mind.
You've got a little time, but I know.
I'll get some more quotes.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
You're talking about Redford.
Yeah, Redford bought your book.
Yeah, Redford bought my book.
I'm distinctly the poor cousin next to Nick Evans, but I have utterly no complaint.
That's not a bad number, though, as reported.
The 1.4?
1.25.
Is it 1.25?
Yeah, it's actually not.
It's 1.
But 1 is nice.
Believe me, it's incredible.
Are you kidding?
I wouldn't have survived yesterday's New York Times review, and it wasn't even a bad review, but I would have been so.
Was it not a bad review?
As one who writes them, I write a lot of reviews, too, in addition to my column.
I read the whole review.
He liked the book, it seemed to me.
Grudgingly.
Well, yeah, he came to it at the end.
But, see, he saw that Harvard thing and he smacked his lips.
And finally he has a chance to tell the readers that he went to Harvard, I guess.
And then he goes to the Harvard Club in New York.
Big deal.
Big fucking deal, as they say.
Let's get back on track with the book.
We were talking, you were going to give me your response to
The legal system, OJ, all this other stuff, and also the congressional effort now to limit... Legal cap liability and limit access.
Take it anywhere you want.
I don't stand here as an expert in the law, nor did I set out to write a polemic about legal reform.
What I wanted to do, and what I think I've done, is I wrote about one case, and insofar as that case can shed light, can be emblematic in any way of other cases, then I've succeeded.
But if you notice in the book, there is no kind of polemic.
I don't make the judgment.
I let people come to the conclusion themselves that the system doesn't work perfectly.
For my money, however,
It's a very good system.
It gives people access to the courts, and I truly think it's one of the best systems in the world.
But it's a system created by human beings, and it's a system in which it's run— It's abused, too.
It's abused, it's true.
And again, I hate to jump over to the criminal side, but just look at this Simpson thing in California.
It's outrageous.
It is, but what would you do?
take the television camera out?
Well, there are all kinds of minor adjustments that one can make along the way.
The problem is that the system, it's not the principles behind the system, the principle of fairness, the principle of a jury deciding your case, and the principle of access, the promise of fairness and that you'll get your case heard.
All of those principles are wonderful principles.
The fact is that people
are running these organizations, and people are fallible.
People have their biases.
You know, Jefferson said about democracy, you have to be eternally vigilant.
And I think that's true of any system, of the legal system.
Exposure to light, seeing how the system works.
The OJ case may result in legal reforms of a sort.
I don't think that these guys are playing to the cameras, though.
You don't?
Well, I'm sure that they are, but I don't think the cameras are the sole reason for this case
going on for eight months.
Well, all I know is the Susan Smith thing comes on, and it's slam-bam out two weeks.
I'm wondering if... Susan Smith didn't have $5 million to hire a team of lawyers.
But if it had national television on it, maybe there would have been some pro bono stuff there, too.
I wonder what these guys in the L.A.
case would take.
I mean, this is probably a $20 million defense, right?
Who knows?
I think whatever his net worth is, is what the
Exactly.
Charndyze versus Charndyze.
The trial, the lawsuit goes on until there's no money left and then it ends.
You saw the woman who was doing the Menendez brothers.
They've got no more money.
I mean, that was a very serious, you know, she's telling you something there, I think.
I guess it's true.
You know, trial is theater.
It really is.
Oh, it is.
And it's, it can be.
But it's also supposed to be justice.
Interesting point.
You know, I mean, is it abused?
It probably is, but... Tell me a little bit about yourself, a little bit of the biographical stuff.
Did you have any legal background knowledge prior to this case?
Was it kind of on the job?
It was definitely on the job, yeah.
I had none in particular, no more than the average kind of interested person.
As I said before I began this case, I had been interested in writing about medical malpractice as an issue.
I kind of explored that very briefly and read some things, but I had no formal legal background at all.
During the course of writing, I mean, I knew the fundamental kind of things like plaintiff's lawyers' work on contingency fees and expert witnesses, just generally what most people would know.
I began writing about this around the time that LA Law was a terrific hit.
And it was supposed to be done in two years.
I thought I was going to miss the legal wave completely.
No one knew it was going to be a tidal wave.
But I think a good book is a good book.
I have in my book, I did a lot of journalism for my book.
Remember the book thief that stole the 23,000 books?
Steven Blumberg.
Remember the guy that went through 45 states and climbed up elevator shafts?
You probably don't remember that.
It was a pretty big story.
I went to his trial, but he's been in prison now for four years.
I'm fearful this story's going to get old, but it doesn't.
When it comes out, it just renews attention.
Ninety-nine percent of the people in America don't even remember this case.
Of course, that's true.
Maybe 99 is conservative.
I know it because I live around here.
I grew up in Lowell.
Some people, when I describe it to them, they have this vague, vague memory of something like this.
I mean, it was on 60 Minutes just before trial, and when it's on a program of that kind of dimension, it seeps in there, and they have this stupidity.
Or up under the circumstances.
Or they think they remember it kind of thing.
In Grafton, where I live, of course, Wyman Gordon had this case where they polluted the groundwater.
Thankfully, I live up on a hill.
Common occurrences.
It's quite a concern.
Yeah.
It's everybody's nightmare, isn't it?
Can you trust the tap water?
Exactly.
Air and water.
It's more fundamental than that.
Yeah.
I mean, real basic stuff.
And of course, your plaintiffs were basically blue-collar, working-class people.
I mean, you talk about having the means to pursue a suit.
You know, O.J.
has maybe $20 million, and he can have this $15
member team.
So Schlichlin was actually doing this whole thing on spec.
Absolutely.
The way all plaintiff lawyers were usually not at such a scale.
There is a disparity there, isn't it?
Do you think you gave them the best defense, not defense, but the best presentation of their case that they could have received?
To my mind, I don't believe anyone could have done better.
I mean, this is a guy who went
to every length.
And he didn't do it just for them.
He did it for himself.
Of course.
But he spent money, the kind of money no other lawyer would be willing to risk.
He risked everything.
And he's a damn good lawyer.
He really is.
He's incredibly thorough and a quick study on things like hydrogeology and all kinds of medical stuff.
He's a good lawyer.
He's a smart guy.
Did he give him the best that anyone could have given him?
I don't know how anyone could say, even though some of the people are disenchanted with him at this point.
They wanted more money, of course.
As he said, when there's money on the table, things turn ugly.
Isn't that true?
There are other very skilled, very talented lawyers who could have done the same.
The question is, would they?
Would they be willing to put everything at risk to do it?
Do you think that your presence...
in these sessions and these things affected any of what happened?
We talked about posturing and talking to the camera.
Well, you were the camera.
Yeah.
Good question.
Were they alert to your presence?
And you think maybe some of this bravado and these great quotes came knowingly that Boswell is here, you know, and there's a book in the office with a contract, so there is a book in the office.
He was interested in the book and remained interested in it for quite a while, except when he went off to Hawaii, I didn't speak to him for a year and a half, and I simply couldn't reach him.
I tried to.
I had a lot of questions to ask.
I think it's a question you can't really answer.
Did my presence affect the outcome?
Not the outcome so much.
Or affect their behavior.
Certainly, I think there's no possible argument that my presence affected the outcome.
it may have affected their behavior to some degree.
I tend to think not.
I mean, you become a piece of the furniture, really.
And in the heat of matters, when they become passionate about something, you know, it doesn't matter who the hell is around.
In the writing, you're very, very aware to keep yourself entirely out of it.
I mean, you really are the unseen...
I'm not a participant, but in some cases you're the only person there while the conversation is going on.
You mentioned it at the back.
Well, obviously I'm the only one there, and the person engaging in the colloquy is me.
But why was it so important to you, even in those cases, to keep yourself entirely out of it?
There's only so many ways you can write.
the book.
You can use the first person.
I find it intrusive.
I do too, but sometimes, as in cases like that, I wonder if that's the only... Well, there's a device that Tracy called First Person Limited, which essentially is the way he told The Soul of a New Machine.
Thereafter, as following three books, he was always the omniscient, the third person, narrated in the third person.
First person limited has its use.
You have to introduce yourself fairly early.
And then you essentially can fade from the scene.
And when necessary, you can appear again.
You know, Conway said to me.
But I can't have suddenly, you know, on page 200 of the book, Conway said to me.
I mean, it has to be set up in a way.
And I didn't see a way to set it up early on.
And moreover, I think...
I simply didn't want to.
It's just a device that's a narrative device.
What I had to say about this, my observations of it, or how I got the story, you know, is not... Well, nobody gives a shit about how I got the story.
Yeah, exactly.
And I didn't have any particular profound observations.
I didn't want to be an actor in this.
I wanted to watch the other people.
No, I absolutely believe.
I mean, I get so angry when I see reporters whining about Ohio.
I don't know how rude somebody is, but who cares?
That's not what you're getting paid for.
Get the story.
I really wanted to keep myself out of it.
And I think I still do.
I can't envision a circumstance in which I'm not the actor.
Just a couple of things.
What's up in Stonehenge?
I have to be taped for something.
Oh, I don't know what it is.
Continental Cablevision, a bookcase.
Tell me briefly about yourself, where you're from, how old you are, why?
Forty-six.
Just turned forty-six.
I'm married, no kids.
My wife teaches at Smith, where I taught briefly, a course of non-fiction.
I was born in Wisconsin.
Never lived any place for more than three years in my entire life until New Haven, where I met my wife.
Wisconsin, Chicago, Berkeley.
My father was in the diplomatic corps.
Israel, Germany, France.
I went to school at William & Mary.
I started working as a journalist in New York at ABC Radio.
I wasn't a journalist, I was a gopher, essentially.
Got me interested in news.
But I was more interested in writing.
I knew I wanted to write since I was about 11 years old.
I started reading Sherlock Holmes, Arthur Conan Doyle.
My father had this great, thick book.
It was just riveting.
I just loved it.
So I left ABC and went to work for Scott Meredith, a literary agent.
Got fired from them because I was put in foreign rights and I was doing nothing but writing these fucking letters.
And I couldn't get the letters right.
I love these guys.
That's good.
You know, I did some work.
Went to New Haven and did some work for the New Haven Register.
A lousy paper.
Oh, it sucks.
We bought like a horrible chain to it.
Dreadful paper.
Just the pits.
Then I started working for a weekly newspaper.
This was in the mid-70s when weekly newspapers were
It was like the real paper from the Phoenix where they were.
They really meant something in those days.
They were carrying the kind of news that the traditional papers didn't carry, anti-nuke stuff that were following that.
Not that I was ever terrifically political on that score, but papers gave me an opportunity to write long.
And that's essentially where I developed my repertorial skills.
I could write 2,000 or 3,000 word pieces
And I did it in New Haven mostly.
I wrote a story about a federal judge.
I wrote a story about a slumlord in 3,000-word pieces.
And I was, throughout that time, I was trying to develop this, you know, you tell a story.
You don't just, you know, lay facts down on the page.
But you, for me, people, people are what drive, you know, characters, what drives every narrative.
And if you can bring a character to life,
And there's an interesting circumstance, conflict, that the character's caught up, and you have a story there.
And so why not try and tell it like a story?
And that's, I was given 2,000 or 3,000 words.
I had to crank out a story a week and do the reporting, too.
It was fun.
I don't remember having slept a full night for years.
So what's next?
I'm going to...
I have a story from a New Yorker I was supposed to finish.
It was supposed to be finished August 31st.
I didn't finish.
It was about the crash of 427 in Pittsburgh.
Incredible story.
That was U.S.
Air, right?
Yeah.
Flying U.S.
Air.
Perfectly good, safe.
Oh, they're pretty good, yeah.
I took a commuter plane out to Syracuse last year, and this was like... I hope not during an ice storm.
No, it was one of those planes, too.
Yeah.
The ATRs?
Yeah, I do some PW pieces and I went out to the Toby Wolfe.
That was like a week before this accident you're talking about.
So you're doing the New Yorker stuff.
Who's the editor you deal with?
Robert Vare.
Is he the non-fiction editor?
I thought Joe Finder's brother was Henry Finder.
Is he at the New Yorker?
I don't know him.
I know Vare because he was at the New York Times and I was doing some pieces with him there.
And he left to go to The New Yorker.
So, I just thought I'd go along.
That's a great fit for you.
That's great.
Good week.
Yeah.
It is.
I mean, it's very visible.
I always wanted to write for The New Yorker.
The problem is, you know, these things take a long time to do a story like this.
It takes a lot of reporting.
It doesn't pay.
Even at the New Yorker, you know.
Well, they're more than 3,000 words out there.
They're more like 5,000 or 6,000.
Yeah.
I think I have 8,500 words to write.
That's a lot.
Do they pay you by the piece or by the word?
They pay you by the word.
They do.
Yeah.
Like a buck a word, a buck and a half a word, something like that.
It's a buck and a half now.
Yeah.
But it's still, you know, if you spend four months on something like that… That's a lot of work.
Telephone calls, travel, travel.
Yeah.
A lot of reporting, a lot of agony in writing, and I find writing to be difficult.
I really love reporting.
Writing for me is hard.
Unlike Tracy, who hates reporting and loves just to be sitting down and writing.
I love reporting.
I enjoy the writing, but it's a pain in the ass.
But I love editing.
I do love tinkering.
That's the fun.
Once you get the first draft down, that's when it starts to be fun.
You can work with it.
You can see how it's going to work, and you can slash stuff out.
That's where the word process is so nice.
Although, God knows, I've spent endless fixing one sentence.
For a long time, I thought I was perfecting the sentence and losing the book.
But on a word processor, you can keep perfecting the sentence.
That's right.
And you can perfect it so many times that you get back to where you started.
I have, I mean, you took your time.